Project Proposal:

What is the proposed title of the project?
Please provide a concise, specific, and descriptive name emphasizing your final project submission. 

Comparing the binding sites of histone modifications between treatment and control samples

Overview of your proposed project

This project will be a simplified guide and pipeline through experimental sequencing data. It will lead you through 
trimming sequence adapters, bowtie alignments, and the production of bigwig files. These files will generate descriptive 
data of the sequenced samples and define where the histone modifications are binding to the DNA of the samples. 
Next, you will be guided through the production of a visualization of the data generated.

(I have not decided what kind of sequencing -- thinking cut and run, cut and tag or chip-seq, will depend on data accessibility).

(Additionally, I have not decided what type of visualization to use, I am considering heatmaps, metagene plots, or maybe igv, or 
another visual tool. I may also guide in narrowPeak production but I am not sure about this part yet.)

What background information is necessary to understand your project?
Histone modifications are epigenetic markers that can be related to the expression of genes. Analyzing the binding sites of these markers 
after specific treatments can help identify the influence that such treatments may have on these markers and in turn, gene expression. 
The binding of these markers and analysis of gene expression after treatment can be compared to control samples to indicate the direct changes made. 
This project will guide you through the process of this analyzing this type of data and help you to visualize the differences in treatment and control samples. 



1. Guide to trim data and align the samples with bowtie2 indexes of a host species.

What will be accomplished?
This will be a guide through trimming and aligning sequences to a reference genome.

How will we know when this is done?
This will be measured by the production of sam files.

Can we do this and when?
Yes, could be done within a week of retrieving sample data.


2. Create bam files from the aligned data and then use the bam files to generate bigwig files

What will be accomplished?
The user will learn to use samtools to view, create bam files, sort, and index. 
All of this preprocessing will be done to then be used in the generation of the bamfiles using bamcoverage.

How will we know when this is done?
This will be done once the files are all generated, and we have official bigwig files for both treatment and control samples.

Can we do this and when?
Yes, could be done within a day or so after alignment.


3. Visualize and interpret data

What will be accomplished?
The user will learn how to both visualize and interpret the data. I will provide a detailed step by step and full guide of 
how to interpret the sample data and hopefully this can be expanded to be more general for other samples the user may encounter 
in the future. The user can use the visualization for figure production.

How will we know when this is done?
This will be measured by the production of figures and a written document of how to interpret the data.

Can we do this and when?
Yes, I am not sure how long this will take as I would like the document to include nearly all possible aspects of interpretation 
and to be as thoroughly detailed as possible. I am projecting this will take a few weeks (maybe 2-3). 





Project Update:



OBJECTIVES:

1. Explain improtant components that can be extracted via biological data

What will be accomplished?
I will provide a few paragraphs explaining the different components that can be extracted from fastq files 
(GC content, rna sequences, amino acids, etc.). This portion will be used to explain what the script will extract, why it is important 
and why it can be used. I plan to discuss in our meeting which specific components will be best to use in the script.

How will we know when this is done?
This will be measured by the completion of the "word doc," and by the presence of thorough analysis of each component. I would like to 
ensure I answer the following questions for each factor. 
What is it, how it is determined, why it is important, and give a few examples of when it can be used and how. I will discuss with Dr. Copper 
if any additional questions many need to be addressed in this section.

Can we do this and when?
Yes, can begin working on this portion immediately after choosing the most important pieces to analyze.


2. Script generation and usage

What will be accomplished?
I will prepare a downloadable script that can be used on any dataset. This script will quickly analyze the data and provide a snap shot of 
the most important details of the data provided in fastq format. Additionally, I will walk them through the paramaters of the script and how to run it. 
Finally, I will provide another section/"word doc" explaining each aspect of this script and how each part works.

How will we know when this is done?
This will be measured by the availability of the script and the completeness of the explanation portion. 
As mentioned in objective one, I will answer questions that will judge the completeness. I will walk through the script line by line and explain: 
how the code works, what it does, and what part of the analysis the code provides.

Can we do this and when?
Yes, this can be done after each component of the analysis is explained. I want the user to understand why they are doing what they are 
doing before just using the script. 

Objective 1: Deliverable - word doc with full analysis. Outcome - questions listed in objective answered in "word doc": Explain what 
the script will extract, why it is important, and why it can be used. I plan to discuss in our meeting which specific components will be best 
to use in the script.

Objective 2: Deliverable - python script and a "word doc". Outcome - the Python script runs as expected with no errors and the questions in the objective 
description are answered: how the code works, what it does, and what part of the analysis the code provides. However, this may be challenging for me to decide 
what i should use as script comments inside the script and what parts to have in the additional explanation.





Final Project
As you can see there were many changes to this project between the proposal, update, and final output.
The initial proposed project was completely changed due to the lack of Python and MySQL use. These changes were influenced by the skills learned throughout the course.
A lot of the proposed ideas were not tools or skills ever addressed in class, and the project was modified to better relate to the course.
The project update was more in alignment with the final project but still had many changes. The idea of the analysis and goals remained relatively consistent.
However, the premise and execution of the project changed. This change was made due to a discussion with Dr. Cooper. I wanted the project to be more focused on
programming than background so that it could be a well-documented portfolio of my skills. I also needed to incorporate MySQL into the project. 
While there is some background information, the project is not as background-heavy as the project update explains.


OBJECTIVES:
1. Trim adapters from FASTQ files and extract DNA sequences.
What will be accomplished?
The user will be able to retrieve SRA and/or FASTQ files, trim adapters, and extract DNA sequences from the trimmed files.

How will we know when this is done?
There will be a MySQL database table generated to provide the user with samples to use for the pipeline. Along with a few sample queries.
Bash scripts will be used to trim adapters and extract sequences.


2. Sequence Analysis

What will be accomplished?
The user will be able to input a python script, DNA sequence file, desired letter count for amino acids, and the line the user wants to analyze.
The program will output the filename, line analyzed, DNA sequence, DNA sequence length, GC content (%), RNA transcript sequence, and the translated protein sequence
in 1 or 3 letter amino acid format.


How will we know when this is done?
This will be measured by the completion of each script and its function without error code outputs from the server. 
MySQL
Bash x 2
Python
